---
layout: page
title: Literary Soundings
permalink: /output_documents/Camlot_2005_ENGL_603_-_Literary_Soundings_SYLLABUS_Fall_2005.html
last_name: Camlot
first_name: Jason
email: jason.camlot@concordia.ca
institution: Concordia U.
title_of_doc: Literary Soundings
file_name: Camlot 2005_ENGL 603 - Literary Soundings SYLLABUS Fall 2005.docx
original_doc_type: Syllabus
primary_discipline: Literary Studies
url: .nan

---
***Literary Soundings (ENGL 603/2)* \[2005-2006\]**

**Jason Camlot Telephone: 848-2424 x2353**

**Office: LB 505-5 Email: camlot@vax2.concordia.ca**

A new field is emerging in literary studies, one that is concerned not
only with the implicit aural qualities of literature, but also with the
technologies by which the sounds of literature are made manifest. Our
work in this seminar will focus on the implications of a critical
practice that distinguishes between words that are read (silently), and
words that are heard. We will consider critical attempts to define the
differences between oral culture and print culture, and we'll examine
the implications for this criticism of the fact that our ears and voices
are now extended and mediated by an array of new sound technologies
(analog and digital recording machines), which represent an alternate,
\"secondary\" domain of orality. A key element of this course will be
the development of a critical vocabulary for analyzing the audible
acoustic elements of a performed work of literature within its larger
cultural context. In *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word*
(1998), Charles Bernstein proposes the term \"audiotext\" for the
cultural artifact in question. His term emphasizes the interplay between
the written and the oral that will be at the core of our efforts in this
seminar, and highlights as its primary critical activity the act of
careful, interpretive listening, applied with the same close attention
and analysis we use to engage written works. Working from the \"sound
texts\" of a custom-made course-CD, we will analyze the audio
productions of literary works ranging from the earliest recordings made
in England of Tennyson and Browning, to the Caedmon poetry recordings of
the 1930-50s, to recent experiments in recorded \"spoken-word\" and
poetic soundscapes. In addition to reading theories of orality and
literacy, and analyzing the spoken performances of literature, we will
also study an array of literary works that themselves thematize the oral
(i.e. those of Du Maurier, Shaw, Beckett, etc.), thus giving written
literature its own \"voice\" upon the subject of our seminar.

**Required Texts*:*

*Literary Soundings (Print)* (Course Pack, Available for Copying in
English Department Office)

*Literary Soundings 1 & 2 (Audio)* (Course CD, To be Distributed at
second class meeting)

Charles Bernstein, Ed., *Close Listening* (Oxford)

Joseph Conrad, *Heart of Darkness* (Dover)

George Du Maurier, *Trilby* (Broadview)

George Bernard Shaw, *Pygmalion* (Dover)

T.S. Eliot, *The Wasteland and Other Poems* (Faber)

Samuel Beckett, *Krapp's Last Tape* (Faber)

**Recommended Texts* (For Sale in Concordia Bookstore)*

Walter J. Ong, *Orality and Literacy* (Routledge)

Lisa Gitelman, *Scripts, Grooves and Writing Machines* (Stanford)

John Picker, *Victorian Soundscapes* (Oxford)

Jonathan Sterne, *The Audible Past* (Duke)

Requirements:

- Seminar-Leading (Oral Presentation) **20%**

- Critical Listening Journal (DUE In Class, WEEK 10) **30%**

- Final Seminar Paper **30%**

- This is a seminar, which means we will be thinking out-loud together.
  In order for a seminar to work you must complete all of the readings
  and be prepared to talk about them. For this reason, your
  participation is also calculated into the final grade. Participation
  **10%.**

- Power Papers: On TUESDAY *December 6^th^* we will have a roundtable of
  miniature power papers. You will each have exactly 5 MINUTES (no going
  over) to present (in whatever form you like) *one* insight you have
  had during the semester about "the sound of literature." I'll explain
  more about what this will entail as the date approaches. Your power
  paper will count for **10%** of your grade.

***What the above list of requirements means*:**

*Seminar Leading:* For each class one or two students will be designated
"seminar leaders" and will be required to lead discussion in
readings/recordings of the day (primary, secondary or both, as you
decide) with the goal of directing the rest of the class in discussion
and exploration of aspects of the readings according to a line of
thinking, argument, or exegesis-in-progress developed by the leader(s).
These are not formal papers and *are not to be read*, although you may
work from notes. The leader will be required to distribute to the class
a handout (one page, or so) of the key points and issues that will be
touched upon. This handout may also include quotations from the readings
as a means of focusing our work together. You are *required* to include
on this handout *at least three* formally posed questions and/or
formulated theses to test out on the class. In your presentation, you
will call our attention to these questions/theses, elaborate a bit upon
how you arrived at them, and then work to solicit response from your
peers. The attention of the seminar leader should be on the readings and
listenings we have done for class, and your seminar leading should not
be overly dependent upon other sources (although your might use outside
sources as a means of framing a question or thesis). Think of this as an
exercise in pedagogy as well as an exercise in criticism. Think about
what will work to invite participation or discussion in a seminar
context.

*Critical Listening Journal:* The journal should involve several
things: 1) Basic responses to the recorded materials, in terms of
describing, in the most basic of ways, what you hear, and what questions
the recordings raise for you. 2) Considerations of the recordings in
relation to the readings, again, in terms of the kinds of questions you
think are interesting to ask. 3) Early (or developed) formulations of
how you might go about answering some of those questions. 4)
Self-conscious work on developing a useful critical vocabulary for
talking about sound. (For this last point, I strongly advise that you
jump ahead to some of the expository readings of Week 10---Godfrey, La
Dri√®re, and Schafer on "Notation" and "Classification"---to help you
begin to think about different kinds of vocabulary and notation for
recording the audible.) You can bring the recordings or readings to bear
on any number of literary or critical works you have already encountered
(in your previous education), or simply work with the materials for this
course as a contained unit. You can expand the range of materials you
listen to as much as you like. The questions and answers you pursue in
your journal should, however, ultimately lead to the development of a
more specific, research paper. So think of it as an opportunity to
brain-storm on the page, with the ultimate goal of determining the
questions you\'re most interested in asking, and which you\'ll attempt
to answer, through research and thought, in your seminar paper. (In
addition to the kind of exploration I have just described, at least
*two* of your journal entries should be devoted to the following
listening and written recording exercise, designed along the lines of
the *soundwalk* as R. Murray Schafer describes it in the "Listening"
chapter of *The Soundscape*: You should prepare yourself (clean your
ears), and then take a deliberate soundwalk, wherever you please. You
may or may not bring a sound recording device with you on this walk.
Then you should sit down and write about it. The initial writing can be
descriptive, narrative, analytical, probably some combination of all of
these. But the culmination of this sound walk will be a short *poem*.
Yes, a poem. What do I mean by poem? Well, that's a key part of this
exercise, which is designed to have you think about the relationship
between the two words in the title of this course: Literary & Sounding.)
Apart from this specific assignment, the journal is open to whatever
questions seem important to you. A long list of the kinds of questions
you should be asking yourself in these journals---based upon ideas
generated in the first class---will be distributed in WEEK 2.

*Final Seminar Paper:* This may, or may not, emerge out of materials you
examined in your journal, or oral presentation. You will have to come
talk to me about it some time during the term, but no later than the
week of **November 30^th^**. It is up to you to come talk to me about
your essay ideas. The final paper is ***DUE 4PM, Thursday, December
15^th^*** . I will not grant "In Progress" grades, so be sure to get
your work in on time.

**The Critical Listening Journal**

A few ideas, possible questions that might be approached in your
Critical Listening journal. This list is by no means exhaustive.

\--Is there a theoretical stance (concerning poetics, performance, etc.)
implicit in the reading of the poem?

\--Does the performance of the poem corroborate or challenge actual
theories attributed to the poet (for example, is Eliot\'s theory of
disinterestedness present in his delivery of *The Wasteland*)?

\--Are spoken word performances automatically dialogical (in a Romantic
sense, then, antithetical to \'lyric\' expression)?

\--What is the context, situation of the performance, and how does that
alter our interpretation of it?

\--What are the important differences between the performed poem, and
the poem on the page, as regards a critical interpretation? How is the
written work altered in the performance?

\--In what ways does a listening audience differ from a reading
audience?

\--In the case of a recorded live performance: How do (visual and other)
aspects of the performance alter out understanding of the sound
recording (for instance, how does knowledge of gesture in a performance
alter our interpretation of the audio-text)?

\--How does the author\'s reading ironize or render more serious a text?

\--How does the appearance of a \"serious\" discourse (such as poetry)
in a medium used mostly for popular entertainment alter each?

\--The impact of celebrity performance of literary works upon each.

\--What kinds of historical/cultural contexts can we construct around a
recording?

\--What is the difference between oration and acting?

\--How does the performance impact upon what the audience absorbs?

\--What is \'instinctively\' learned by listening, as opposed to reading
(for instance, what do we simply assume when we are listening, that we
can\'t when we are reading, and vice versa)?

\--When listening, do we still supply voice (shape it to our own ideas
and inner hearings) or are we simply subject to the voice we hear.

\--Another way of asking this is: does spoken performance simply replace
our imagination during absorption of a literary work, or does it deflect
our imagination to other tasks and areas?

\--How do we explain the absence of a critical heritage concerning
literary recordings?

\--How do literary recordings alter our conception of the history of
interpretation?

\--How is (cultural) legitimacy played out in recorded poems versus
published ones?

\--What is the relationship between the recording technology and
performance?

\--How are temporal and rhythmic aspects of a work different in a
recording than in a printed work?

\--What were the reasons for producing the recording?

\--What are the differences between reading and listening in terms of
aesthetic absorption?

\--What about the recall of literary works: what are the differences in
how a work resides within us after listening as opposed to hearing?

\--How is our conceptual (critical) and emotional relationship to the
work different in reading as compared to hearing?

\--What might we learn from comparing different performances of the same
text (whether contemporary or of different periods)? And comparing these
to the performance recorded by the author him/herself?

\--To what uses have specific recordings been put (i.e. relaxation
tapes, self-esteem tapes, language learning, etc.) and to what critical
effect do we interpret these differences?

\--How does a performance of a poem serve as evidence of an
\'elocutionary\' culture?

\--Are written texts always meant to be read aloud? What kinds of
literature resist effective reading aloud?

\--What effects might we propose sound recording technologies have (have
had) upon literary production? And, how do we go about describing and
\'proving\' these effects (i.e. what can we use as evidence for such
arguments)?

\--What effects have recorded literature had on subsequent written
literature (or subsequent literary recordings)?

\--What issued concerning \'authenticity\' are raised by a work recorded
by its author?

\--What are the difficulties of listening as opposed to reading?

\--Is there a mode or mode of allusion or intertextuality that is
specific to recorded literature, as opposed to written? (i.e. in print
we use quotation marks, in performance we can allude to a voice or
attitude with change of tone, but not change of content?)

\--What is the history of recorded literature as it pertains to
accessibility, disability, etc. ? (Talking Books for the blind, for the
illiterate\...)

\--Distinctions in \"navigation\" (how we work through a text or
audiotext) between listening and reading.

\--Relationship/influence of recorded music upon recorded literature?

\--Who is the audience of spoken word recordings?

\--What cultural changes have allowed for recent ascendancy of talking
books within publishing industry?

\--What is the significance of distinct sound media?

\--Develop ideas towards a psychology of listening/voice, a
phenomenology, a materialist history, an aesthetics, etc.

***\
**ENGL 603/2---Literary Soundings***

***WEEKLY SCHEDULE***

WEEK 1 (SEPT 7): *Introduction. First Listening*.

**Readings*:* Handout---**Alfred Tennyson,** "The Charge of the Light
Brigade", and selected quotes on voice.

Recordings: "The Charge of the Light Brigade" as read by **Alfred
Tennyson, Lewis Waller, Canon Fleming, and Henry Ainley.**

WEEK 2 (SEPT 14): *Theorizing Technology: Sound, Print, and Other Media*

Readings: **Walter J. Ong,** \"Introduction\" and \"Writing Restructures
Consciousness\" from *Orality and Literacy* (CR); **Christian Metz,**
"Aural Objects" (CR); **Friedrich Kittler,** \"Introduction\", from
*Gramophone, Film Typewriter* (CR); **Sven Birkerts,** \"Close
Listening: The Metaphysics of Reading an Audio Book" (CR); **Steve
Connor,** "What I Say Goes" from *Dumbstruck: A Cultural History of
Ventriloquism* (CR); **Charles Bernstein,** \"Introduction\", from
*Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word*; **R. Murray Schafer,**
"Listening" from *The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the Tuning
of the World* (CR)

WEEK 3 (SEPT 21): *Reading Technology Into Things: Sometimes A Voice
Without a Body is Just a...*

Readings: Week 2 readings, continued; PLUS: **Joseph Conrad,** *Heart of
Darkness*; **Ivan Kreilcamp,** "A Voice Without A Body: The Phonographic
Logic of *Heart of Darkness*" (CR); **Jonathan Sterne**, "*HELLO!"* from
*The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction* (CR)

WEEK 4 (SEPT 28): *The Voice of the Phonograph, circa 1900.*

**Recordings*:* Incunabula of recorded sound: **Alfred Tennyson**,
**Lewis Waller, Canon Fleming, Henry Ainley**, \"Charge of the Light
Brigade\"; **Florence Nightingle**, \"Speech\"; **Trumpeter**
**Landfry**, \"Bugle Call\"; **Sir Arthur Sullivan**, \"After Dinner
Speech\"; **P.T. Barnham,** \"Speech\", **O Henry** \"Speech\"; Edison
House: \"Big Ben\", Berliner\'s First German Recording: \"Martial
Band\", **Len Spencer,** "I Am The Edison Phonograph"; **Horatio Nelson
Powers,** "The Phonograph's Salutation". Commercial Recitations:
**Russell Hunting,** "Casey at the Telephone"; **Joe Hayman**, "Cohen on
the Telephone". **Readings*:* **Thomas Edison,** \"The Phonograph and
its Future\" (1878) (CR); **J. Mount Bleyer,** \"Living Autograms\"
(CR); **Edward Bellamy,** \"With the Eyes Shut\" (1889) (CR); Selections
from Recitation Scrap-Books: from **H.M. Soper*, ****Scrap Book
Recitation Series* 1 & 3, **J.E. Frobisher,** *Good Selections* 2 (CR);
**Lisa Gitelman**, "Souvenir Foils: On the Status of Print at the Origin
of Recorded Sound" (CR); **Jason Camlot, "**Early Talking Books: Spoken
Recordings and Recitation Anthologies, 1880-1920" (CR).

WEEK 5 (OCT 5): *Sound Adaptations*

**Recordings*:* **Herbert Beerbohm Tree**, "Svengali"; **Len Spencer**,
"Jeckyll & Hyde"; **Bransby Williams**, "Dream Scene from *The Bells*"
(Take 1), "Dream Scene from *The Bells*" (Alternate Take). **Readings*:*
**George Du Maurier,** *Trilby*

WEEK 6 (OCT 12): *Late Victorian Phonography & The Phonograph*

**Recordings*:* **George Bernard Shaw,** Spoken and Broken English
(Sound Recording). **Readings*:* **George Bernard Shaw,** *Pygmalion*

WEEK 7 (OCT 19): *Recorded Modernism and the New Criticism*

**Recordings*:* **T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land* (1946). **Readings*:*
**T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land*; **I.A. Richards,** *from Principles of
Literary Criticism* (CR), **William Empson,** *from* *Seven Types of
Ambiguity* (CR), **Cleanth Brooks,** \"*The Waste Land*: Critique of the
Myth\" (CR); **Juan A. Su√°rez,** "T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land, the
Gramophone, and the Modernist Discourse Network" (CR)

WEEK 8 (OCT 26): NO CLASS.

WEEK 9 (NOV 2): *Speaking Verse*

**Recordings*:* **T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land* (1946), "A Game of
Chess" (various takes, 1935); **Robert Spaeight,** "A Game of Chess"
(19\--). **Readings*:* **T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land*; **James
Stephens,** "On Speaking Verse" (1937) (CR); **Selections from *The
Listener*** \[print transcripts of a BBC roundtable discussion titled
"Well Versed" that aired in 1941\]: "How Should Poetry be Read?", "Must
Poetry Make Sense?", "Is Verse-Speaking a Lost Art?", "Does it Stick in
the Throat?" (CR); **Austin Clarke,** "Verse Speaking" (1947); **Yvor
Winters,** "The Audible Reading of Poetry" (CR); **Seamus Heaney,** "The
Power of T.S. Eliot" (CR); **Mark Morrisson,** "Performing the Pure
Voice" (CR)

****CRITICAL LISTENING JOURNALS DUE*, Wednesday November 9^th^, In
Class.***

WEEK 10 (NOV 9): *Close Listening* \[For this class, everyone should
have prepared notes towards a 'close listening' of one recordings listed
below to share in class\]

**Recordings*:* **William Butler Yeats,** \"Innisfree\"; **Gertrude
Stein,** \"If I Told Him (A Completed Portrait of Picasso)\"; **Ezra
Pound,** \"Moeurs Contemporaines\"; **Dylan Thomas,** \"Fern Hill\";
**W.C. Williams,** \"The Red Wheelbarrow\"; **Lanston Hughes,** \"The
Ballad of a Gipsy\"; **Sylvia Plath,** \"Daddy\"; **Amiri Baraka,**
\"Bang, Bang Outishly\". **Readings*:* Print versions of poems above
(CR), plus: **Charles Bernstein,** \"Introduction\", from *Close
Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word*; **Donald G. Godfrey,** \"The
Critical Analysis of Spoken Word Broadcasts\" (CR); **J.C. La Dri√®re**,
"Prosody" from *Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics* (CR); **R.
Murray Schafer,** "Notation", "Classification", from *The Soundscape*
(CR)

WEEK 11 (NOV 16): *Memory Tape Subjectivity*

*Readings:* **Samuel Beckett,** *Krapp\'s Last Tape*

**David Morton,** \"The Tape Recorder, Home Entertainment, and the Roots
of American Rerecording Culture\" from *Off the Record: The Technology
and Culture of Sound Recording in America* (CR); **N. Katherine
Hayles,** \"Voices Out of Bodies, Bodies Out of Voices: Audiotape and
the Production of Subjectivity.\" from Adelaide Morris (Ed.), *Sound
States: Innovative Poetics and Acoustical Technologies* (CR).

WEEK 12 (NOV 23): *The Beats Breath & The Bea(s)ts Speak*

Recordings: **Allen Ginsberg**, \"A Mad Gleam\", \"A Supermarket in
California\", \"Howl (For Carl Solomon)\", "Footnote to Howl",
\"America\"; **Michael McClure**, *from Ghost Tantras*. **Readings*:*
**Michael McClure**, from *Ghost Tantras* (CR); **Charles Olson,**
\"PROJECTIVE VERSE\" (CR); **Allen Ginsberg,** "Meditation and Poetics";
**Douglas Kahn**, \"Cruelty and the Beast: Antonin Artaud and Michael
McClure\" (CR).

WEEK 13 (NOV 30)

Class A- 6:00-8:15pm: *Talking the Talk*

**Recordings*:* **David Antin**, \"The Principle of Fit II\". Readings
**Bob Perelman,** \"Speech Effects: The Talk as a Genre\" from *Close
Listening*; **David Antin,** \"a private occasion in a public place\"
(CR)

Class B- 8:30-10:00pm: *Poetry Readings &\"Spoken Word\"*

**Live Readings*:* Catherine Kidd. **Print Readings*:* **Peter
Middleton**, \"The Contemporary Poetry Reading\" from *Close Listening*,
**Maria Damon,** \"Was That \'Different,\' \'Dissident\' or
\'Dissonant\'? Poetry (n) the Public Spear: Slams, Open Readings, and
Dissident Traditions.\" from *Close Listening*

Week 15 (**Tuesday** DEC 6) *Just Listen to Yourself!* *A Round Table of
Power Papers on the Sound of Literature*. I will try to secure a larger
classroom for this day. Location TBA.

**FINAL PAPERS DUE: Thursday, DECEMBER 15, 4pm, LB 501.**
