---
layout: page
title: Literary Sound Studies
permalink: /output_documents/Camlot_2015_ENGL_447_-_Literary_Sound_Studies_SYLLABUS_Fall_2015.html
last_name: Camlot
first_name: Jason
email: jason.camlot@concordia.ca
institution: Concordia U.
title_of_doc: Literary Sound Studies
file_name: Camlot 2015_ENGL 447 - Literary Sound Studies SYLLABUS Fall 2015.docx
original_doc_type: Syllabus
primary_discipline: Literary Studies
url: .nan

---
**ENGL 447/2 AA - Advanced Studies in Literary Theory: Literary Sound
Studies**

Prof. Jason Camlot

Telephone: 514-848-2424 x4272 / x2353

Class Time: Tuesday 18:00-20:15

Office Hours: Tuesday 15:00-16:00 and by appointment held in LB 685-5.

Class Room: LB 646

Email: <jason.camlot@concordia.ca>

In this seminar we will study critical attempts to define the
differences between oral culture and print culture and theories
concerned with the cultural and aesthetic implications of sound and
sound media. A key element of our work will be the development of a
critical and theoretical vocabulary for analyzing the audible acoustic
elements of a performed works of literature within its larger
technological, aesthetic, cultural, historical, sociological and
institutional contexts. The primary challenge of our endeavor will be
the development of useful and compelling ways to approach literary
recordings critically. In *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed
Word* (1998), Charles Bernstein proposes the term \"audiotext\" for the
cultural artifact in question. His term emphasizes the interplay between
the written and the oral that will inform our efforts in this seminar,
and he highlights the critical activity of careful, interpretive
listening, applied with the same close attention and analysis we
(literary scholars) use to engage with written works. While his
application of the New Critical idea of close reading to the domain of
literary audio is evocative, it remains to be seen just how we, as
critics, can develop it into a compelling critical methodology. Part of
our work together will entail devising methodological approaches for
engaging with and interpreting audio productions of literary works
ranging from the earliest recordings made in England of by actors and
eloctionists, to the Caedmon poetry recordings of the 1930-50s, to
recent poetic experiments in recorded talk and sound poetry. Beyond the
analysis of the audio signal of literary recordings we will immerse
ourselves in the theories and approaches that have come to define the
new critical field of sound studies, and consider how this diverse range
of theories can inform our understanding of the relationship between
literature, sound and voice. And, beyond even analyzing spoken
performances of literature and reading critical theory, we will also
study a small selection of literary works that themselves thematize the
voice, sound and audio media (i.e. those of Du Maurier, Shaw, Beckett,
etc.), thus giving written literature its own \"voice\" upon the subject
of our seminar.

**Required Texts*:*

Jonathan Sterne, ed. *The Sound Studies Reader* (2012) **SS**

*Literary Sound Studies Moodle Course Reader* **M**

*Course Reserve* (usually as pdf) **CR**

George Du Maurier, *Trilby* (Broadview)

George Bernard Shaw, *Pygmalion* (Dover)

T.S. Eliot, *The Wasteland and Other Poems* (Norton Critical)

Samuel Beckett, *Krapp's Last Tape and Other Dramatic Pieces* (Grove)

david antin, *Talking* (Kulchur 1972 / Dalkey Archive, 2001)

<http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Antin.php>

**Sound Recordings*: Audio files and links to recordings are available
via our Moodle site.*

**Recommended Texts* (For Sale in Concordia Bookstore)*

Charles Bernstein, Ed., *Close Listening* (Oxford UP, 1998)

\<http://dss-edit.com/prof-anon/sound/library/Bernstein_Close-Listening.pdf\>

Requirements:

- Seminar-Piloting **20%**

- Critical Listening Notebook (DUE In Class, WEEK 10) **30%**

- Final Seminar Project (DUE by 4pm, Friday, December 11^th^) **30%**

- This is a seminar, which means we will be thinking out-loud together.
  In order for a seminar to work you must complete all of the readings
  and be prepared to talk about them. For this reason, your
  participation is also calculated into the final grade.
  Participation**10%.**

- Cylinder Talks: On TUESDAY *December 1st* we will have a roundtable of
  short talks---that is, wax cylinder length talks about your final
  project. You will each have exactly 3 MINUTES (the length of an Edison
  wax cylinder) to present the main idea you are interested in exploring
  in your final project, and to provide one example of how you will go
  about exploring or illustrating that idea. I'll explain more about
  what this will entail as the date approaches. Your Cylinder Talk will
  count for **10%** of your grade.

***What the above list of requirements means*:**

*Seminar Piloting:* For each class one or two students will be
designated "seminar pilots" and will be required to lead discussion in
one reading/recording of the day (primary, secondary, as you decide)
with the goal of directing the rest of the class in discussion and
exploration of aspects of the texts according to a line of thinking,
argument, or exegesis-in-progress developed by the leader(s), *for a
period of approximately 20 minutes*. These are not formal papers and
*are not to be read*, although you may work from notes. The leader will
be required to distribute to the class a handout (maximum one page
single spaced) of the key points and issues that will be touched upon.
This handout may also include quotations from the readings as a means of
focusing our work together. You are *required* to include on this
handout at least *one formally posed question and one formulated thesis*
to test out on the class. In your piloting, you will call our attention
to these questions/theses, elaborate a bit upon how you arrived at them,
and then work to solicit responses from your peers. The attention of the
seminar pilot should be on the readings and listenings we have done for
class, and your seminar piloting should not be dependent upon other
sources (although your might use outside sources as a means of framing a
question or thesis). Think of this as an exercise in pedagogy as well as
an exercise in criticism. Think about what will work to invite
participation or discussion in a seminar context. Be organized,
creative, thoughtful and attuned to the collaborative goals of the
seminar.

*Critical Listening Notebook:* The Notebook (either handwritten or
computer-typed) should involve several things: 1) basic responses to the
weekly readings, noting aspects of the readings that seem particularly
useful or perplexing to you, and evidence of your attempt to engage with
the ideas forwarded in them; 2) basic responses to the recorded
materials, in terms of describing, in the most basic of ways, what you
hear, and what questions the recordings raise for you; 3) consideration
of the recordings in relation to the readings, again, in terms of the
kinds of questions you think are interesting to ask (so, a combo of 1 &
2); 4) early (or developed) formulations of how you might go about
answering some of those questions (lists of possible theses, hypotheses,
outlines of possible papers you could write, etc.); 5) lists of keywords
from the readings that you don't understand, and evidence of your
attempts to come to understand them; 6) self-conscious work on
developing a useful critical vocabulary and/or methodology for talking
critically and interestingly about literary sound. For this last aspect
of your journal you may find readings by Don Ihde, Michel Chion, Kate
Crawford, James Lastra, and Mladen Dolar (to name a few from the SS
reader), as well as the chapters on "Notation" and "Classification" in
R. Murray Schafer's *The Soundscape* (available on Course Reserve)---to
help you begin to think about different kinds of vocabulary and notation
for recording the audible. You can bring the recordings or readings to
bear on any number of literary or critical works you have already
encountered (in your previous studies), or simply work with the
materials for this course as a contained unit. You can expand the range
of materials you listen to as much as you like. *The questions and
answers you pursue in your journal should, however, ultimately lead to
the development of a more specific, research paper*. So think of it as
an opportunity to experiment on the page with the ultimate goal of
determining the questions you\'re most interested in asking, questions
you will attempt to answer, through more extensive research and thought,
in your final seminar project. In short, the notebook is open to
whatever questions seem most important to you. Try to be as focused as
possible in your lines of inquiry. A long list of the kinds of questions
you may be asking yourself in these journals---based upon ideas
generated in our first class together---will be distributed in WEEK 2.

*Participation:* Attendance counts as part of the participation grade,
as you cannot participate if you are not present. Come to class prepared
by having done the required reading and listening, and with notes
(perhaps already recorded in your notebook) that can inform our work
together. In addition to fulfilling this seminar requirement, there will
be a few small 1-page writing assignments during the course of the term
that will contribute to your participation grade.

*Final Project, Option 1---Seminar Paper:* This will, normally, emerge
out of materials you began to explore in your journal, or oral
presentation. Your final seminar paper should develop a theory or
reading of a cultural artifact (a work of literature, a material object,
an event, etc.) so that a persuasive thesis and illustration of that
thesis is effectively presented in a written work of 10-12 pages.

*Final Project, Option 2---Essay on The Poetry Series*: Close Listening
and contextual analysis of a reading from the Sir George Williams Poetry
Series: 1966-1972. For this final project option you will be required to
explore the SpokenWeb digital archive of spoken recordings that document
(audibly) a reading series that was held at Sir George Williams
University (now Concordia) between 1966-74. You will have a look at the
series as a whole, but ultimately will choose a way to focus your
research on a single reading, or small cluster of readings, in relation
to historically contextualizing research about any of the following: the
import of a particular reader/poet (say, Robert Creeley, Irving Layton
or George Bowering) in relation to the poetry reading as cultural event
in the 1960s and 70s, performance and poetics, digital interfaces for
documentary literary recordings, the Quiet Revolution (and parallel
Québécois poetry readings taking place around this time, i.e. Michèle
Lalonde's "Speak White" \< <http://youtu.be/B-VrPNpyy2g> \>),
nationalist arguments for Can Lit, the Canadianization Movement, the
poetry reading and particular 'scenes' of poetry Montreal, New Wave
Canada, TISH, Beat, Black Mountain, San Francisco Renaissance, etc.;
American vs. Canadian poetics, etc., etc. You may access the archive
using this url: \<<http://spokenweb.concordia.ca/>\>. Of possible use to
you: A special issue on The Reading Series can be found at

\< [www.amodern.net](http://www.amodern.net) \>.

Whether you selection Option 1 or 2 for your Final Project, you will
have to come talk to me about your proposed project some time during the
term, but no later than the week of **November 30^th^**. It is up to you
to come talk to me about your essay ideas, and to hand in a 1-page
précis or outline of your idea. Sign up sheets will be available on my
office door. The final paper is ***DUE at 4PM, Friday, December
11^th^*** . I will not be inclined to grant "In Progress" grades, so be
sure to get your work in on time.

Other relevant points of information:

*Language*: Writing assignments may be completed in English or French.

*Plagiarism*: This is defined in Concordia's *Academic Code of Conduct*
as "the presentation of the work of another as one's own or without
proper acknowledgement." Familiarize yourself with the Code and an
extended definition of plagiarism at the Student hub page concerned with
Academic Integrity:

\< https://www.concordia.ca/students/academic-integrity.html\>

There is also a useful Student Services document entitled "Avoiding
Plagiarism" at:

\<
https://www.concordia.ca/content/dam/concordia/offices/cdev/docs/writing/help-academic-writing/AvoidingPlagiarism.pdf\>

*Term Dates and Deadlines*: For information on academic deadlines
(registration, DNE, DISC, etc.) consult the Term Dates and Dedlines
(2015-16) page on the Student hub:

\<http://www.concordia.ca/students/registration/term-dates-deadlines.html\>

***WEEKLY SCHEDULE***

WEEK 1 (SEPT 8): *Introductions (including tour de table); Review of
Syllabus and Requirements; "What is Literary Theory?"; First Reading and
Listening Exercises*; *Close Listening Notebook Brainstorming Session.*

Recordings: **Basil Rathbone,** reading "The Bells" by Edgar Allen Poe;
**Allen Ginsberg,** "A Mad Gleam"; **Michael McClure,** "Ghost Tantra
71"; **William S. Burroughs,** "The Last Words of Hassan Sabbah"; **C.D.
Wright,** excerpt from Master Class at Concordia 2013.

NOTE: Lachine Canal Audiowalk, September 10, 12-1:30pm:

\<http://www.concordia.ca/events/cuevents/artsci/history/2015/09/lachine-canal-audio-walk.html\>

Point St. Charles Audiowalk, September 11, 12-1:30pm:

\<http://www.concordia.ca/events/cuevents/artsci/history/2015/09/pointe-saint-charles-audio-walk1.html\>

WEEK 2 (SEPT 15): *Theories and Methodologies: Sound, Print, and Other
Media*

**Readings*:* **Don Ihde,** "The Auditory Dimension" (SS); **R. Murray
Schafer,** "The Soundscape" (SS); **Charles Bernstein,**
\"Introduction\", from *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word*
(CR/M)

**Murray Schafer,** "Notation", "Classification", from *The Soundscape*
(CR/M); **Michel Chion**, "The Three Listening Modes" (SS); **Craig
Dworkin,** *A Handbook of Protocols for Literary Listening* (M)

**Recordings*:* TBA. ALSO: *You will sign up for Seminar Piloting this
week.*

WEEK 3 (SEPT 22): *Early Recordings: The Voice of the Phonograph, circa
1900.*

**Recordings*:* **Horatio Nelson Powers,** "The Phonograph's
Salutation"; "The Charge of the Light Brigade" as read by **Alfred
Tennyson, Lewis Waller, Canon Fleming, Henry Ainley and Rose Coughlin**;
**Len Spencer,** "I Am The Edison Phonograph"; **Russell Hunting,**
"Casey at the Telephone"; **Joe Hayman**, "Cohen on the Telephone".

**Readings*:* **Thomas Edison,** \"The Phonograph and its Future\"
(1878) (M); **Lisa Gitelman,** "The Phonograph's New Media Publics"
(SS); **Friedrich Kittler,** "Gramphone" (SS)

(NOTE: SEPT 25 6-8:30pm. Homecoming Dramatic Readings of Mordecai
Richler:
\<http://www.concordia.ca/cuevents/offices/vpdersg/aar/2015/09/25/resolute-forest-products-presents-homecoming-keynote-lecture.html\>)

WEEK 4 (SEPT 29): *Phonographic Reading and Sound Adaptations*

**Recordings*:* **Herbert Beerbohm Tree**, "Svengali"; **Len Spencer**,
"Jeckyll & Hyde"; **Bransby Williams**, "Dream Scene from *The Bells*"
(Take 1)

**Readings*:* **George Du Maurier,** *Trilby*; **John Durham Peters,**
"The Telephonic Uncanny and the Problem of Communication" (SS); **Roland
Barthes,** "The Grain of the Voice" (SS)

NOTE: October 1, Irish poet Paula Meehan reads at Concordia:

\<http://www.concordia.ca/artsci/artsci/english/cuevents/artsci/canadian-irish-studies/2015/10/01/irish-poet-paulameehanreadsatconcordia.html\>)

WEEK 5 (OCT 6): *Phonographic Drama*

**Recordings*:* **George Bernard Shaw,** Spoken and Broken English
(London Linguaphone Institute 1927).

**Readings*:* **George Bernard Shaw,** *Pygmalion*; **Mladen Dolar,**
"The Linguistics of the Voice" (SS)

WEEK 6 (OCT 13): *Recorded Modernism and the New Criticism*

**Recordings*:* **T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land* (Library of Congress
1946); "A Game of Chess" (alternate unreleased take, 1935); "The Three
Voices of Poetry" (National Book League Annual Lecture, 1956); **Robert
Spaeight,** "A Game of Chess" (Spoken Arts, 1956).

**Readings*:* **T.S. Eliot,** *The Waste Land*, the poem, plus readings
by I. A. Richards, F.R. Leavis, and Cleanth Brooks in the "Criticism"
section of the Norton Critical Edition; **Adriana Cavarero,** "Multiple
Voices" (SS).

WEEK 7 (OCT 20): *Caedmon. Hi-Fi Midcult.*

*Close Listening of a Single Poem* \[For this class, everyone should
prepare notes towards a 'close listening' of one recordings listed below
to share in class, and to hand in to me, max. 1 page.\]

**Recordings*:* **William Butler Yeats,** \"The Lake Isle of
Innisfree\"; **Ezra Pound,** \"Moeurs Contemporaines\"; **Gertrude
Stein,** \"If I Told Him (A Completed Portrait of Picasso)\"; **Dylan
Thomas,** \"Fern Hill\"; "Do Not Go Gentle to That Good Night"; **Robert
Frost,** "The Road Not Taken"; **Robert Lowell,** "Skunkhour"; **Robert
Penn Warren,** "Sirocco"; "**e.e. Cummings,** "If everything that
happens can't be done"; **Joseph Brodsky,** "Nature Morte"; **Sylvia
Plath,** "The Thin People".

**Readings*:* *Find your own* print versions of poems above and bring
them to class, where possible, plus, **Jacob Smith,** "Hi Fi Mid-Cult"
from *Spoken Word* (CR/M);

WEEK 8 (OCT 26): *Def Poetry*

**Viewing*: The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air*, "Def Poet's Society", Season
1, Ep. 7, 23 mins.

**Recordings*:* **Tennyson, Waller, Fleming, Ainley,** "The Charge of
the Light Brigade"; **Sylvia Plath,** "Daddy", **Amiri Baraka,** "Three
Modes of History and Culture", from a reading at the Asilomar Negro
Writers Conference, Pacific Grove, CA, 1964, Track 14 (at Pennsound);
"Black Art"; \"Kongo Bells\"; **Vachel Lindsay,** "The Congo -- complete
reading", item #10; **Jack Kerouac,** "American Haikus"; **Ice Cube,**
"AmerikKKA's Most Wanted"; "Turn Off the Radio"'; **Will Smith and DJ
Jazzy Jeff**, "Parents Just Don't Understand"

**Readings*:* **Sylvia Plath,** "Daddy" (M); **Amiri Baraka,** "Three
Modes of History and Culture"; "Black Art" (M); **Vachel Lindsay,** "The
Congo" (M); **Brandon LaBelle**, "Auditory Relations" (SS)

WEEK 9 (NOV 3): *The Reading Series: SpokenWeb*

Recordings: Listen to the following recordings from the Sir George
Williams Poetry Series available at \< <http://spokenweb.org>\> under
the SGW Reading Series link (M): **Robert Creeley** (1967); **Irving
Layton** (1967); **Robert Creeley** (1970); **Allen Ginsberg** (1969);
**Jackson Mac Low** (1971); **Margaret Atwood** (1974)

**Readings*:* From the special issue of *Amodern* 4 \<
<http://amodern.net>\> read: **Jason Camlot and Christine Mitchell,**
"The Poetry Series" (M); **Jason Camlot and Darren Wershler,** "Theses
on Discerning The Poetry Series" and familiarize yourself with the rest
of the issue (M); **Kate Crawford,** "Following You: Disciplines of
Listening in Social Media" (SS); **Charles Bernstein,** "The PennSound
Manifesto" (M)

****CRITICAL LISTENING JOURNALS DUE*, Tues November 10^th^, In Class.***

WEEK 10 (NOV 10): *Talking Book:* *Audio Fiction*

**Recordings*:* **William Sterling Battis,** "Micawber" from Charles
Dickens' *David Copperfield*; **Librivox Contributor** readings of
Charles Dickens, *A Christmas Carol* (Versions 1-8, plus "Condensed by
the Author" version)

Readings: Sven **Birkerts,** \"Close Listening \[The Metaphysics of
Reading an Audio Book\] (M); **Matthew Rubery,** "Canned Literature: The
Book After Edison" (CR/M).

WEEK 11 (NOV 17): *Memorex*

**Readings*:* **Samuel Beckett,** *Krapp\'s Last Tape*

**John Mowitt,** "The Sound of Music in the Era of Its Electronic
Reproducibility" (SS)

**James Lastra,** "Fidelity Versus Intelligibility" (SS)

WEEK 12 (NOV 24): *Sound/Poetry*

*Literary Event Analysis* \[For this class, you will each prepare notes
towards an analysis of one live literary event you have attended during
the semester to share in class, and to hand in to me, max. 1 page.\]

**Recordings*:* **Jaap Blonk,** "Rhotic" for voice (Reading at Kelley
Writer's House, University of Pennsylvania, November 11, 2004); Excerpt
from demonstration of notations and sounds at Concordia (2013);
**Christian Bok,** EUNOIA, Chapter e (June 22, 2002).

Readings: **Jaap Blonk,** "Rhotic" (Phonetic Etude #1, 1991, about the
r);

**Christian Bok,** Digital setting of EUNOIA, Chapter e (for rené
crevel)

Readings: **Douglas Kahn**, "Noises of the Avant-Garde" (SS)

WEEK 13 (DEC 1): *Talk Poetry*

*Recordings**:* **David Antin**, \"The Principle of Fit II\" (M via
PennSound).

Readings: **david antin,** *Talking*, especially "Talking at Pomona"
plus the Introduction by Marjorie Perloff and afterward by antin;
**Shuhei Hosokawa,** "The Walkman Effect" (SS)

WEEK 14 (DEC 8): *Cylinder* *Talks on final projects*.

In this class each seminar participant will present a 3-minute (wax
cylinder length) talk about their final project.

***FINAL PROJECTS DUE in my LB 646 mailbox by 4PM, Friday, December
11^th^***
